Add getting started guide of ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL (#245)
scalar-labs/helm-charts: docs/getting-started-scalardb-analytics-postgresql.md

|  +-------------+                                                                                                                       |  |
|  | OLTP client | ---(Load sample data with a test OLTP workload)-----------------------------------------------------------------------+  |
|  +-------------+                                                                                                                          |
|                                                                                                                                           |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

## Step 1. Start a Kubernetes cluster

First, you need to prepare a Kubernetes cluster. If you're using a **minikube** environment, please refer to the [Getting Started with Scalar Helm Charts](./getting-started-scalar-helm-charts.md). If you have already started a Kubernetes cluster, you can skip this step.

## Step 2. Start MySQL and PostgreSQL pods

> ScalarDB including ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL can use several types of database systems as a backend database. In this guide, we will use MySQL and PostgreSQL.

Reviewer: Sorry, I missed this mention of `we`.

```suggestion
ScalarDB including ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL can use several types of database systems as a backend database. In this guide, you will use MySQL and PostgreSQL.
```

Author: No problem! Thank you for pointing it out! 🙇‍♀️

|  +-------------+                                                                                                                          |
|                                                                                                                                           |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

## Step 1. Start a Kubernetes cluster

First, you need to prepare a Kubernetes cluster. If you use a **minikube** environment, please refer to the [Getting Started with Scalar Helm Charts](./getting-started-scalar-helm-charts.md). If you have already started a Kubernetes cluster, you can skip this step.

## Step 2. Start MySQL and PostgreSQL pods

ScalarDB including ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL can use several types of database systems as a backend database. In this document, we use MySQL and PostgreSQL.

You can deploy MySQL and PostgreSQL on the Kubernetes cluster as follows.

1. Add the Bitnami helm repository and update it.

   ```console
   helm repo add bitnami https://charts.bitnami.com/bitnami
   ```

   ```console
   helm repo update bitnami

>    ```

Author: > Or maybe the following (combining the commands) could work?

Yes. It works.
However, I will apply the first one because I want to make these steps one-by-one as much as possible.

We will create some configuration files locally. So, create a working directory for them.

1. Create a working directory.

   ```console
   mkdir -p ~/scalardb-analytics-postgresql-test/
   ```

## Step 4. Set the versions of ScalarDB, ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL, and chart

Set the following three environment variables. If you want to use another version of ScalarDB and ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL, please set the versions that you want to use.

{% capture notice--info %}
**Note**

You must use the same minor versions (for example, v3.10.x) of ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL as ScalarDB, but it's not necessary to keep the same patch versions. For example, it's fine to use ScalarDB v3.10.1 and ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL v3.10.3 together.
{% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--info">{{ notice--info | markdownify }}</div>

```console
SCALARDB_VERSION=3.10.1
```
```console
SCAlARDB_ANALYTICS_WITH_POSTGRESQL_VERSION=3.10.3
```
```console
CHART_VERSION=$(helm search repo scalar-labs/scalardb-analytics-postgresql -l | grep  -e ${SCAlARDB_ANALYTICS_WITH_POSTGRESQL_VERSION} | awk '{print $2}' | sort --version-sort -r | head -n 1)

> ```

Author: Ah, sorry. I overlooked it.
Good catch! Thank you!

> ## Step 5. Load sample data to MySQL and PostgreSQL (run OLTP transactions)

Author: Yes. It's accurate!
Thank you for the suggestion!

   scalar.db.multi_storage.storages.storage0.username=root
   scalar.db.multi_storage.storages.storage0.password=mysql
   
   # Storage 1
   scalar.db.multi_storage.storages.storage1.storage=jdbc
   scalar.db.multi_storage.storages.storage1.contact_points=jdbc:postgresql://postgresql-scalardb.default.svc.cluster.local:5432/postgres
   scalar.db.multi_storage.storages.storage1.username=postgres
   scalar.db.multi_storage.storages.storage1.password=postgres
   
   scalar.db.multi_storage.namespace_mapping=customer:storage0,order:storage1
   scalar.db.multi_storage.default_storage=storage1
   EOF
   ```

1. Download Schema Loader from [ScalarDB Releases](https://github.com/scalar-labs/scalardb/releases).

   ```console
   curl -OL https://github.com/scalar-labs/scalardb/releases/download/v${SCALARDB_VERSION}/scalardb-schema-loader-${SCALARDB_VERSION}.jar
   ```

1. Run Schema Loader (Create sample tables).

   ```console
   java -jar scalardb-schema-loader-${SCALARDB_VERSION}.jar --config database.properties --schema-file schema.json --coordinator
   ```

1. Load initial data for the sample workload.

   ```console
   ./gradlew run --args="LoadInitialData"
   ```

> 1. Run the sample workload (OLTP transactions).
> 
>    ```console
>    ./gradlew run --args="PlaceOrder 1 1:3,2:2"
>    ```
> 
>    ```console
>    ./gradlew run --args="PlaceOrder 1 5:1"
>    ```
> 
>    ```console
>    ./gradlew run --args="PlaceOrder 2 3:1,4:1"
>    ```
> 
>    ```console
>    ./gradlew run --args="PlaceOrder 2 2:1"
>    ```
> 
>    ```console
>    ./gradlew run --args="PlaceOrder 3 1:1"
>    ```
> 
>    ```console
>    ./gradlew run --args="PlaceOrder 3 2:1"
>    ```
> 
>    ```console
>    ./gradlew run --args="PlaceOrder 3 3:1"
>    ```
> 
>    ```console
>    ./gradlew run --args="PlaceOrder 3 5:1"
>    ```
> 
>    These commands create several `order` information as sample data.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
1. Run the sample workload of OLTP transactions. Running these commands will create several `order` entries as sample data.

   ```console
   ./gradlew run --args="PlaceOrder 1 1:3,2:2"
   ```

   ```console
   ./gradlew run --args="PlaceOrder 1 5:1"
   ```

   ```console
   ./gradlew run --args="PlaceOrder 2 3:1,4:1"
   ```

   ```console
   ./gradlew run --args="PlaceOrder 2 2:1"
   ```

   ```console
   ./gradlew run --args="PlaceOrder 3 1:1"
   ```

   ```console
   ./gradlew run --args="PlaceOrder 3 2:1"
   ```

   ```console
   ./gradlew run --args="PlaceOrder 3 3:1"
   ```

   ```console
   ./gradlew run --args="PlaceOrder 3 5:1"
   ```

````

   cat << 'EOF' > ~/scalardb-analytics-postgresql-test/scalardb-analytics-postgresql-custom-values.yaml
   scalardbAnalyticsPostgreSQL:
     databaseProperties: |
       scalar.db.storage=multi-storage
       scalar.db.multi_storage.storages=storage0,storage1
       
       # Storage 0
       scalar.db.multi_storage.storages.storage0.storage=jdbc
       scalar.db.multi_storage.storages.storage0.contact_points=jdbc:mysql://mysql-scalardb.default.svc.cluster.local:3306/
       scalar.db.multi_storage.storages.storage0.username=root
       scalar.db.multi_storage.storages.storage0.password=mysql
       
       # Storage 1
       scalar.db.multi_storage.storages.storage1.storage=jdbc
       scalar.db.multi_storage.storages.storage1.contact_points=jdbc:postgresql://postgresql-scalardb.default.svc.cluster.local:5432/postgres
       scalar.db.multi_storage.storages.storage1.username=postgres
       scalar.db.multi_storage.storages.storage1.password=postgres
       
       scalar.db.multi_storage.namespace_mapping=customer:storage0,order:storage1
       scalar.db.multi_storage.default_storage=storage1
   schemaImporter:
     namespaces:
       - customer
       - order
   EOF
   ```

> 1. Create a secret resource to set a superuser password of PostgreSQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a secret resource to set a superuser password for PostgreSQL.
```

   ```console
   kubectl create secret generic scalardb-analytics-postgresql-superuser-password --from-literal=superuser-password=scalardb-analytics
   ```

1. Deploy ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL.

   ```console
   helm install scalardb-analytics-postgresql scalar-labs/scalardb-analytics-postgresql -n default -f ~/scalardb-analytics-postgresql-test/scalardb-analytics-postgresql-custom-values.yaml --version ${CHART_VERSION}
   ```

## Step 7. Run an OLAP client pod

To run some queries via ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL, run an OLAP client pod.

> 1. Start an OLAP client pod on the Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Start an OLAP client pod in the Kubernetes cluster.
```

   ```sql
   scalardb=# SELECT * FROM "order".statements;
                  order_id               | item_id | count
   --------------------------------------+---------+-------
    5ae2a41b-990d-4a16-9700-39355e29adf8 |       2 |     2
    5ae2a41b-990d-4a16-9700-39355e29adf8 |       1 |     3
    f3f23d93-3862-48be-8a57-8368b7c8689e |       5 |     1
    696a895a-8998-4c3b-b112-4d5763bfcfd8 |       4 |     1
    696a895a-8998-4c3b-b112-4d5763bfcfd8 |       3 |     1
    9215d63a-a9a2-4471-a990-45897f091ca5 |       2 |     1
    9be70cd4-4f93-4753-9d89-68e250b2ac51 |       1 |     1
    4e8ce2d2-488c-40d6-aa52-d9ecabfc68a8 |       2 |     1
    658b6682-2819-41f2-91ee-2802a1f02857 |       3 |     1
    4e2f94f4-53ec-4570-af98-7c648d8ed80f |       5 |     1
   (10 rows)
   ```

1. Read sample data in the `order.items` table.

   ```sql
   SELECT * FROM "order".items;
   ```

   [Command execution result]

   ```sql
   scalardb=# SELECT * FROM "order".items;
    item_id |  name  | price
   ---------+--------+-------
          5 | Melon  |  3000
          2 | Orange |  2000
          4 | Mango  |  5000
          1 | Apple  |  1000
          3 | Grape  |  2500
   (5 rows)
   ```

> 1. Run the `JOIN` query.
> 
>    For example, you can see the order history of each user as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Run the `JOIN` query. For example, you can see the order history of each user as follows.
```

Author: Ah, sorry. I forgot to update this explanation when I updated the SQL query in another comment.
So, I fixed it in 096a22321efd9663f03dd227331e0a48ca413dda .

# Getting Started with Helm Charts (ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL)

> This document explains how to get started with ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL using Helm Chart on a Kubernetes cluster as a test environment. Here, we assume that you already have a Mac or Linux environment for testing. We use **minikube** in this document, but the steps we will show should work in any Kubernetes cluster.

Author: I think we can use some Linux distributions of WSL. In practice, I use Ubuntu on WSL2 on my laptop to test these steps.

Also, I think WSL is included in the `Linux environment`. So, I think we don't need to state WSL explicitly here. This is because if we mention a specific distribution, we have to test all distributions that are listed in this document.

This document explains very general steps on `minikube` or some kind of Kubernetes. So, I think we don't need to mention and test OS as a platform. It takes a lot of costs but there is no benefit to match it.

     --set auth.rootPassword=mysql \
     --set primary.persistence.enabled=false
   ```

1. Deploy PostgreSQL.

   ```console
   helm install postgresql-scalardb bitnami/postgresql \
     --set auth.postgresPassword=postgres \
     --set primary.persistence.enabled=false
   ```

1. Check if the MySQL and PostgreSQL pods are running.

   ```console
   kubectl get pod
   ```

   [Command execution result]

   ```console
   $ kubectl get pod
   NAME                    READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
   mysql-scalardb-0        1/1     Running   0          3m17s
   postgresql-scalardb-0   1/1     Running   0          3m12s
   ```

## Step 3. Create a working directory

We will create some configuration files locally. So, create a working directory for them.

1. Create a working directory.

   ```console
   mkdir -p ~/scalardb-analytics-postgresql-test/
   ```

## Step 4. Set the versions of ScalarDB, ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL, and chart

Set the following three environment variables. If you want to use another version of ScalarDB and ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL, please set the versions that you want to use.

{% capture notice--info %}
**Note**

> You must use the same minor versions (for example, v3.10) between ScalarDB and ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL. However, the patch versions are not synchronized between them. We recommend using the latest patch versions of both products in the same minor version.

Author: Thank you for your review. Actually, I was wondering how should I explain the versioning of each product...

How about adding examples as follows?

```suggestion
You must use the same minor versions (for example, v3.10.x) between ScalarDB and ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL. However, the patch versions are not synchronized between them. We recommend using the latest patch versions of both products in the same minor version. For example, use ScalarDB v3.10.1 and ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL v3.10.3.
```

Or, how about make it simple as follows?

```suggestion
You must use the same minor versions (for example, v3.10.x) between ScalarDB and ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL. For example, use ScalarDB v3.10.1 and ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL v3.10.3.
```

> You must use the same minor versions (for example, v3.10) between ScalarDB and ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL. However, the patch versions are not synchronized between them. We recommend using the latest patch versions of both products in the same minor version.

Reviewer 2: I prefer the simpler one. I also suggest stating explicitly that it's not necessary to keep patch versions the same. How about the following? 

```
You must use the same minor versions (e.g. v3.10.x) of ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL as ScalarDB, but it's not necessary to keep the same patch versions. For example, it's fine to use ScalarDB v3.10.1 and ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL v3.10.3 together.
```

> You must use the same minor versions (for example, v3.10) between ScalarDB and ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL. However, the patch versions are not synchronized between them. We recommend using the latest patch versions of both products in the same minor version.

Author: @choplin  
Looks good! Thank you for the suggestion!
I applied it in 9c179ef9f5f75ab73c72a50d7f452553ea4536f8 .
Please take a look again when you have time!

> You must use the same minor versions (for example, v3.10) between ScalarDB and ScalarDB Analytics with PostgreSQL. However, the patch versions are not synchronized between them. We recommend using the latest patch versions of both products in the same minor version.

Reviewer 2: Nice! Thank you!

    9be70cd4-4f93-4753-9d89-68e250b2ac51 |       1 |     1
    4e8ce2d2-488c-40d6-aa52-d9ecabfc68a8 |       2 |     1
    658b6682-2819-41f2-91ee-2802a1f02857 |       3 |     1
    4e2f94f4-53ec-4570-af98-7c648d8ed80f |       5 |     1
   (10 rows)
   ```

1. Read sample data in the `order.items` table.

   ```sql
   SELECT * FROM "order".items;
   ```

   [Command execution result]

   ```sql
   scalardb=# SELECT * FROM "order".items;
    item_id |  name  | price
   ---------+--------+-------
          5 | Melon  |  3000
          2 | Orange |  2000
          4 | Mango  |  5000
          1 | Apple  |  1000
          3 | Grape  |  2500
   (5 rows)
   ```

1. Run the `JOIN` query.

   For example, you can see the order history of each user as follows.

   ```sql
   SELECT
     c.customer_id,
     c.name,
     o.order_id,
     i.name,
     s.count
   FROM
     customer.customers AS c
     LEFT OUTER JOIN
       "order".orders AS o
       ON c.customer_id = o.customer_id
         LEFT OUTER JOIN
           "order".statements AS s
           ON o.order_id = s.order_id
             LEFT OUTER JOIN
               "order".items AS i
               ON s.item_id = i.item_id

>    ORDER BY c.customer_id, o.timestamp, o.order_id;

Reviewer 3: Using window function might be good example. Like this? (sorry if it doesn't work in advance)

```sql
select * from (
    select c.name, c.credit_limit - c.credit_total as remaining, array_agg(i.name) over (partition by c.name) as items
    from orders o
    join customers c on o.customer_id = c.customer_id
    join statements s on o.order_id = s.order_id
    join items i on s.item_id = i.item_id
) x group by name, remaining, items
```

And I think this query can be improved...

>    ORDER BY c.customer_id, o.timestamp, o.order_id;

Reviewer 2: I suppose, to show how ScalarDB Analytics can extend the capability, the query should include complex joins, aggregations, and sorting. I'm not familiar with the dataset of this example, so I'll try it later and consider good examples.

>    ORDER BY c.customer_id, o.timestamp, o.order_id;

Author: @komamitsu  
Thank you for your suggestion! I modified it a bit mainly to fix syntax errors on actual PostgreSQL, but I was able to run it as follows!

```sql
scalardb=# SELECT * FROM (
scalardb(#     SELECT c.name, c.credit_limit - c.credit_total AS remaining, array_agg(i.name) OVER (PARTITION BY c.name) AS items
scalardb(#     FROM "order".orders o
scalardb(#     JOIN customer.customers c ON o.customer_id = c.customer_id
scalardb(#     JOIN "order".statements s ON o.order_id = s.order_id
scalardb(#     JOIN "order".items i ON s.item_id = i.item_id
scalardb(# ) AS remaining_info GROUP BY name, remaining, items;
     name      | remaining |           items
---------------+-----------+----------------------------
 Suzuki Ichiro |      1500 | {Grape,Orange,Apple,Melon}
 Yamada Hanako |       500 | {Orange,Grape,Mango}
 Yamada Taro   |         0 | {Orange,Melon,Apple}
(3 rows)
```

I think it is better than my sample! (Because my sample does not use any aggregate functions and `GROUP BY` despite it being an OLAP example...)
So, at this time, I adopt your suggestion. Thank you!

@choplin  
As I mentioned above, I applied a new SQL query. At this time, I use it in this document. But, we can update it whenever in the future. So, please feel free to ask me to update it when you find better SQL queries and sample workload!

>    ORDER BY c.customer_id, o.timestamp, o.order_id;

Reviewer 2: Sure! Anyway, it looks good to me!
